- Hello, YouTube.
Hello, Nathaniel.
- Hey, how's it going?
- Hey, it's going really well.
Thanks for being here on the live stream at the moment
and on the podcast very soon.
After everyone out there watching,
thank you for being here.
If you've got comments, thoughts,
throw them out into the live chat.
We'll try to make them part of the show.
If you're watching later, of course,
thanks for being here, but no live comments in the past.
All right, and with that, let's kick it off, huh?
- Sounds good.
- All right.
All right. Nathaniel, welcome back to Talk Python To Me.
- How's it going?
- It's going real well. It's going real well.
We're on the eve of the eve of PyCon. How about that?
- Okay, yeah.
- I don't know how many, maybe it's the third,
the eve to the third, but we're very near PyCon.
I'm pretty excited.
- Yeah. Anti-penultimate eve. I don't know.
- The penultimate eve, perhaps? Yeah, exactly.
So I suspect a lot of people will be listening to this show
on their way to PyCon.
So if you are, awesome.
Come say hello to me.
I'm going to be doing some live shows,
ask me anything, some various other things.
Are you going to be at PyCon this year?
- I'm not, I'm not unfortunately.
- So they're going to have to just shoot you a message
on Twitter or on Mastodon or something like that, right?
- Yeah, I'm easy to find.
- Yeah.
- Whatever, yeah.
- Yeah, excellent.
Cool, well, everyone going to PyCon,
hope you have a great time and do come say hi.
And with that, we're gonna be talking about this project,
this new PEP about distributing Python itself,
kind of like you distribute Python packages,
but a little bit more.
Why not?
I mean, it seems pretty reasonable to me
and I'm super, super excited to see you work in this area
because Python is so strong in so many areas
and there's just a couple of like really big gaps
that other technologies have nailed so well.
Two of them that I see that are super significant
is like, "Hey, Michael, I wanna build a mobile app.
"How do I do that in Python?"
Or, "I wanna build a desktop app.
Like, I'm not sure you should even think about doing like,
desktop maybe, mobile.
I mean, Kivy is great, but it's not like a general purpose
UI toolkit.
And so that's the one.
The other is, hey, I have an application.
I want to give it to someone who is not a developer
and have them run it, right?
And there are some tools that address that.
But one of them is just like,
well, how do they get Python at all?
And your product, your pep, and some of the ideas
relate specifically to how do we make it easier
to get a pre-built non-admin,
not installed for the whole system, Python for somebody
so they can run an app or even for developers, right?
- Yeah, I mean, in fact, I mean, I'm a developer,
so that's kind of in some ways the original use case,
you know, scratch your own itch.
- Yeah, of course.
- But yeah, I mean, it's just,
it's a very general capability, I think, once you have it.
So yeah, I mean, the motivation there is basically like,
there are lots and lots of ways to get Python, right?
You can get it from the Windows Store,
it comes with pre-installed on your Mac,
but not a very good one.
- Yeah, not quite, sort of.
- But there's also Homebrew or PyEnv
or your Linux distro has it,
and you can get it through Conda.
And if you download Blender,
oh, there's secretly a Python inside.
You know, like, it's just,
there's just so many different ways to do it.
And that's great.
know, like it's good to have all these options. They all serve different use cases. But it's
sort of silly that, you know, it's obviously it's, you know, it's flexible. There's lots
of ways to do it. But there's no way to just be like, okay, like I just want a zip file.
That's Python. And it's like a standard way that's like supported and, you know, kind
of we all use so we can all sort of share benefits and improvements and all of that.
So that's kind of the key.
The PEP is not that innovative in terms
of what it's actually doing.
It's a zip file with Python in it.
But it's just sort of trying to do kind of the logistics
of like, OK, but let's all agree on how
we're going to put it on PyPI.
Let's have tags and stuff so tools
can figure out what they're looking at
and do stuff automatically.
And I think that unlocks a lot of use cases, just
that one simple change.
I think it does as well.
I mean, your abstract is one of the more concise ones
I would say.
- Sure, yeah.
- Tell people about the abstract here.
- Yeah, the abstract on the PEP is,
it's quote, "Like wheels,
but instead of a prebuilt Python package,
it's a prebuilt Python interpreter."
That is the full abstract.
I figured that basically, you know,
tells people what they need to know.
- Yeah, so the idea is kind of like you would say,
pip install request.
you might say pip install Python 3.11,
except for that you can't use the word pip
because pip is built on Python.
And so you need Python to run.
I mean, it's a little bit circular there.
So you kind of need something outside of Python,
but conceptually it's,
I have these things I need to run my app.
I need requests, SQLAlchemy and beautiful soup.
I also need Python 3.11.
So those are my dependencies.
Give me that, right?
- Yeah.
And I mean, you could even imagine potentially pip install Python 3.11
working, I suppose.
Like, you would need some Python to run pip.
But once you have that, then it's probably still convenient to be able to say,
OK, actually, shoot, I got this bug report saying in 3.11.2 specifically,
there's some issue.
I'm not sure if I can reproduce it.
Like, being able to just grab that in one command, pretty useful.
But that said, yeah, it's not necessarily--
PIP isn't necessarily the target.
I've been working on some stuff there as well.
I don't know if you want to go into that.
- Yeah, we'll definitely get into it.
I think you need something a little bit on the outside
and I think ideally doesn't depend on Python
being on the system because that,
it would be perfectly useful for it to depend on Python.
- Right.
- And this gives you a different version.
This gives you a way to quickly toggle
between these versions and these different setups.
But if you could omit that dependency on Python,
all of a sudden you give away to give it to people who are not developers and use cases where it's
not just I already have Python and I need to do maybe you're a developer but you're not a Python
developer should you have to manage your own Python installation so that you can use you know
something that needs Python to run against your source code right that is not Python so there's
there's a lot of scenarios where I think it gets unlocked if you use a different foundation. Yeah
Some of the-- one of the audiences definitely
I have in mind here is people with taking
their very first ever programming course
on the first day of class.
Right now, it's pretty awkward that you're like, OK, well,
first you have to go to python.org
and then click through here and click there and download that.
Oh, wait, no, not that version.
Right, oh, did you forget to check to put in your path?
Oh, dear.
Hold on.
Yeah, and oh, no, do you use the PyLauncher?
Are you on Windows?
It's just this extra fiddliness.
And it's funny, we've spent all this effort
the last few years, getting wheels to the point where they can just work. You can just pip install
NumPy and it works everywhere, stuff like that. But Python itself isn't there yet.
Another use case, maybe my primary use case, audience I have in mind is I develop Python
packages and it's open source and distributed on PyPI, stuff like Trio. And so I have the problem
of, you know, I want to be welcoming to new contributors, right? I want to, you know,
bring them in, get them started first, quickly. They're volunteers, so like, I don't want them
like faffing around and struggling and getting stuck trying to just like run the tests or
anything like that, right? Like both that's just a waste of time. It's like kind of rude and
inconsiderate. And it's also, you know, there's likely they'll just give up, you know, if it's
just a casual, like, you know, they aren't really invested yet. It's just something they're doing
for fun or out of interest. I really want to make that easy for them. And so part of the vision
here is like, you know, be able to say, oh, yeah, so you check out Trio, you type this git clone
command, and then you have some kind of Python management tool installed. You type that tool,
you run tests, and it makes sure you get the right version of Python and set up the environment
correctly and then it executes it for you and it knows what tests are, how to run the
tests in this project as it looks at, I don't know, pyproject.toml or whatever.
And so just sort of capturing all, we have all those pieces, but we don't really have
anything that kind of brings them all together into that, like just type one thing, that's
it.
It's going, and it just works.
We don't have many, we honestly don't have many tools that are outside looking in, in
Python.
of our tooling and our infrastructure is you have Python. Now, now you start with the tools.
Now you install it. Now you install Black or Ruff or other.
Yeah, there's just this kind of very old assumption, which I mean, it made sense like
10, 15, 20 years ago, where sort of everything was sort of installed manually. And of course,
you have, you're going to go through some work to like get set up with Python. It's the foundation
of your whole environment. And then you to kind of we add stuff to make it easier on top of that,
But I think it's time to go back and re-evaluate that foundational assumption.
Yeah, absolutely. So you mentioned Trio. I know before we dive too much further in,
I want to give you a chance to let the folks know what you're up to. We'll talk about Trio
at the end if we've got time. But what have you been up to since June 29, 2018, five years ago?
Right, last time I was on the podcast.
Yeah, last time you were on the show.
Yeah.
Wow, that was really early in Trio's life, I guess, actually.
So I mean, I've had a lot of just real life has happened.
Then I was sick for a while and trying
to kind of get back on my feet, did some consulting,
just started a new job.
So it's kind of a lot of distractions.
But also, yeah, I think Trio is still--
I still like it a lot.
It's definitely had more influence.
Actually, had I even published the Structured Concurrency blog
post then?
I don't remember.
I feel like-- it sounds familiar to me,
even though it's been five years.
It does sound familiar.
I do think so.
But what has happened since then certainly
is Python has seen some of these ideas and adopted them.
like 311's concurrency stuff.
- Yeah, so there's been a,
like sort of the influence has gone a lot further
than I ever expected, both actually in other languages.
So, yeah, like Swift and Kotlin
and have all kind of adopted ideas from here.
Java apparently is making some big changes coming up soon
with a whole new concurrency setup.
And they're like saying like, yeah,
we're basing it on that Nathaniel Smith's
random blog post.
It's kind of like, okay, sure.
- Interesting, okay, amazing.
- Okay, you know, it's very flattering.
But yeah, and yes, also in the Python itself,
it's sort of complicated 'cause we,
it's sort of this awkward situation
where there's async.io that's in the standard library
and then there's my sort of competing thing, Trio,
which, yeah, I guess we should say,
Trio is an async library for Python that's portable.
It's sort of an alternative to async.io.
There are some tools to let you use both at once,
but it's not a library for async.io.
It's its own thing.
And so obviously, we all wish there
was just one obvious choice.
I kind of looked--
but async.io is also in this very difficult position,
being in the standard library and being sort of built up
over time.
And a lot of it was designed before we even
stuff like Async/Await.
So there's just a lot of machinery
in there that's already committed
to other ways of doing things, and it's very hard to change.
And Trio was like, well, look, we
have all these modern things, and some new ideas coming in,
like structured concurrency is a better way to write
concurrent programs.
And it was able, since it had a clean slate, to really do that
all from the start.
It'd be much simpler.
So that was important, you know,
to have it be its own thing,
just so we could, you know, work that stuff out.
Then there's a question of, okay, now what?
Do we all switch to Trio?
Do we move it back into my sync IO?
Do they both continue?
- That's been a debate for some really popular things.
I think that is interesting.
A lot of people say, well, why is library X,
which everyone uses, why is that not built into Python?
Why do I need to pip install it?
And a lot of times the answer is
because making it part of Python
will harm its ability to innovate and change.
It'll slow it way down.
Yeah.
Like there was a whole debate some years ago about--
we all know the HTTP client in Python,
URLib or whatever, is just really bad.
You should just never use it.
And it's broken a lot of ways.
You just don't use it.
But we still ship it because it would be too disruptive
to take it out.
That's also why we can't change it.
There's just too much code out there,
depending on all the weird quirks.
And we don't want to ship something else,
because then it'll end up being like URL lib five years later.
So it was a question of, should we
put requests in the standard library,
or URL lib 3, or one of these?
And it's just, then you can't ship security fixes.
You can't improve your API.
You can't-- so as we've gotten better at packaging also,
it's taken some of the pressure off the standard library
to be all things to all people.
And I think that's a good direction overall
to be moving as an ecosystem.
I agree.
When the standard library first came into existence,
there was no PyPI.
And there was no package.
It had to come with it, because how else are you
going to get it?
Hunt it down on Usenet and on base64 and code it.
But what are you going to do?
Yeah, or maybe you find it--
you download, I don't know, Twisted or something
like from an FTP site.
Yeah, or an FTP site or something like that.
good and have to put it in your pipe. Like it was all totally, yeah, knocking rocks together.
Hope it's Flint and it creates a spark. Yeah. So I think the motivations and the
decisions, the way you might lean in making the decisions are really different now. Like I would,
even though we're already far down the road and making changes is breaking and doesn't make sense,
it might make sense to ship less in the standard library,
quite a bit less, and just say,
"Oh, you're going to pip install some meta package
that explodes out some section.
I'm going to pip install the collections area.
Boom, and now I got a bunch more."
>> Yeah.
>> Potentially, who knows?
>> One thing I'd really like to see as a possible future there
is moving some of the standard library
into wheels that are installed by default.
>> Yes, exactly.
>> Exactly.
>> So it's sort of this halfway house,
where it's still the case you download Python, install it,
they're there.
So we don't just break everyone in the world who
just assumes they're there.
But then it gives us that--
both in the long term, if it's like we want to get rid of it,
it gives us--
or push it out to PyPI or just remove it entirely.
Then it gives us a way to do that more gradually.
But also for libraries like Async.io
that are big and complex and really
would benefit from being able to have their own release cadence
add bug fixes and deprecation cycles and all of that,
then it's like, yeah, it still ships with Python,
but then you can pip upgrade it.
You're not stuck with that exact version.
That could only change when a whole new Python release comes out,
and you have to take all those changes together at once.
Yeah, I've absolutely had this thought,
and I think it's a really elegant solution,
because on one hand, it lets the core developers focus more
on the true essence of Python.
And it lets it be used in more locations, right?
Think PyScript, for example, or MicroPython, right?
It might be that you create a central core
that is exactly the same on all of these.
You don't have to consider,
like, of course, this is what runs, it runs everywhere.
But you still get that backwards compatibility,
and you get the ability to say,
actually, I want the newest version of AsyncIO,
because I want this more high-performance background
worker or something. Yeah, or even just, I mean, for smaller, like, you know, I don't want the
newest version of async.io because, like, I don't know if it works, but I want to install in a
scratch environment this, like, development version so I can try it out and give them feedback before
they, you know, really make the release and set the API in stone. And again, like, right now, like,
you'd have to go build your own Python and it's like, it's just kind of a whole thing, right? You
You can't just do install --pre.
- Right, exactly.
It's definitely more of a barrier
for people who are just casually wanting to test stuff out.
You gotta be pretty committed to getting Python 3.12,
alpha six or whatever we're at, right?
- Yeah. - Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Indeed.
Okay, very cool.
Maybe we'll come back and dive into Trio a little bit more,
but yeah, and what are you doing these days?
You talked about doing a little consulting and...
Well, yeah, so I just started a new job just like last week,
week before, I guess.
Yeah, it's been less than two weeks.
>>Exciting.
>>Yeah, I'm working at Anthropic,
which I don't know if anyone's heard of.
It's still somewhat stealthy, but it's sort of--
>>What's now?
>>Yeah, I mean, quickly changing.
I don't know the exact status currently.
But yeah, so my understanding of the background
here is that there's actually the team
at OpenAI who trained GPT-3,
just sort of sat down together and decided
they really wanted to do more of like a pure focus
on like interpretability and safety.
Like how do you get these models?
Like how do you know what these models
are actually gonna do?
And how do you get them to do what you want
instead of kind of stuff like making things up
or just, we've all kind of got the scene now
how these large language models can go
just all over the place, do all kinds of strange things.
And they decided--
>>Luis: There's even one of them being sued for slander,
I believe.
>>Tom: Yes.
Yeah.
>>Luis: Somebody in the UK, I think.
>>Tom: Yeah, well, yeah, there's one that just,
if you ask the model, can you give me
some advantages of problems with sexual harassment in law
schools?
And it just picks five real law professors and makes up stuff.
It's really, really bad.
Yeah.
And it like sites sources that are all made up.
Like it's, you know, like they, you know, they're just,
they're very powerful, but also not well understood
or how to like kind of make it useful and safe.
- Just a little bit of devil's advocate though.
They are incredibly powerful
and they are incredibly capable.
And that's, I think part of the danger is you're like,
oh my God, it knows this.
Oh my gosh.
It understood all of that.
And I ask it, so the fifth thing it says,
you're like, well, at this point I'm convinced.
So it really is on.
And then maybe that's the made up one.
And I think that's the danger is 'cause it's actually,
it's almost an uncanny valley.
It's close enough to right,
but you're like, okay, this thing's right.
It knows. - Yeah.
So, yeah, so personally,
like I'm still kind of up in the air on
how impactful it'll be, where the impact will be.
Like I think it's just a lot of open questions.
- You haven't bought a farm,
like a goat farm in the woods
'cause you've just given technologies a blow out now?
Okay, all right, good to hear.
But I guess I do have stock options now, apparently.
Or I will at some point if they vest.
So I guess that's the other route.
But no, but anyway.
So I was just saying, so yeah, so Anthropics,
just interesting company where you actually
get to play with some of those big models internally.
They're kind of working on releasing products now.
But it's also been kind of just really interesting
to kind of get the sense internally of like,
it's really kind of this like research culture,
which is appealing to me.
I'm sort of coming out of academia,
have a lot of like numerics background.
And what's also as interesting is that part of the reason
we kind of connected is that apparently,
it turns out a ton of their internal infrastructure
runs on Trio.
So they're partly hired me to support that
and are actually giving me time
to work on open source paid time.
So actually they are funding this PEP 711,
Python binary stuff, though they don't know it yet.
- Now they do.
- Yeah, if they listen to the podcast, they'll learn.
- That's great, that's really cool.
It looks like an interesting area to be working.
I agree that the research oriented places,
they are fun area to work, right?
- Yeah, and there's just a lot of flexibility kind of,
you know, like it's clear this stuff is gonna have effects,
which effects and how big and all that, I don't know,
but, you know, being at ground zero is, you know.
- It's exciting.
- It's really exciting, yeah.
and a lot of chance of maybe have some impact.
- Cool. - Yeah.
- All right, let's dive into the pip.
The pip, the PEP.
- The PEP.
- That is not quite pip, but it's kind of like pip.
Okay. - Yeah, okay.
- So we talked a little bit about the motivation.
We talked a little bit about what it is.
Maybe tell us a bit about the spec.
Like what does the PEP actually say?
What is it actually trying to deliver?
And we can talk about like the use cases
and some of the tools for it and so on.
- Yeah, I mean, and so, like I said,
the abstract deal is like wheels,
but it's an interpreter instead of a package.
That's partly just sort of a tagline of how you use it,
but it's actually also a lot about
how the actual spec is written.
It's just sort of like, well,
we've done a ton of work over the last five, 10 years.
A lot of people have put a lot of work
into making wheels work, right?
terms of like figure out, okay, how do we, you know, have metadata that's usable to like keep
track of, you know, which packages are installed and their versions and which ones are compatible.
And if for a binary build, like which systems can you put this on and, you know, all the many Linux
work and just all of that stuff. And it's just like, well, you know, so we have wheels, we don't
need to reinvent the wheel again. So I'm just sort of taking all of that. So it's just like, okay,
it's mostly just a delta against the wheel spec.
It's like, OK, in the wheel spec,
you have this directory for metadata.
I have that same directory, but I'm
calling these Python binaries PyBys just
to have a short name you can stick in a prefix--
or sorry, in a file extension.
Yeah, pybi.
Yes.
.pybi.
I like it.
Yeah.
The PyPy, the interpreter, and PyPI, the package repository,
confusing enough. I thought I'd add another near homonym.
- Pi, pi, it's pi, bi. - Yeah. Anyway. But they look like, the file
names look like wheels. Something like Cpython -version-miniLinux217.pibi. The context looks like wheels. They're
basically just zip files. Instead of a .diskinfo directory, you have a pi,bi info directory,
And it has a metadata file that's
in the same format as wheel metadata files
for the name and version and description, all that stuff.
There are a few tweaks, basically just what you need
specifically for interpreters.
OK, so one thing that makes it a lot simpler
is that there's only one interpreter in a Python
environment, right?
Whereas wheels are designed to be flexible and be installed
into different kinds of Python environments
with different layouts.
A pyby is just a raw set of files.
You unzip it.
That's it.
You're done.
Where wheels, there's like, well,
you want to put this in site packages,
so you have to go find that.
Whereas this goes in the bin directory,
so you have to go find that and do the special--
so that part's just not relevant.
Leave that out.
There's some slight-- we have to support
symlinks, which wheels don't, mostly just because there's
never been a big compelling reason.
What's that?
>> For the Windows folks out there, maybe,
and others who just haven't been--
what the heck are symlinks?
>> Yeah, OK, well, so, yeah, symlink
is a classic Unix concept.
Though Windows does have them too now, I guess,
where it's like a special magic file that,
instead of having its actual contents,
It just lists, says, go look at this other location
on the file system for my content.
- It's like an app shortcut, but for programs, not for UI.
- Well, like built into the file system though.
- Yes, exactly.
So you try to open it, it goes to the other one.
- Yeah, the operating system automatically opens
that other file for you.
But you could also look at,
if you can say, can you show me the symlink
and it'll tell you about it if you ask.
But if you don't, then it just magically works.
And it's mostly, it's just, it turns out that traditionally
Unix Pythons tend to use these,
both for things like, you know, in your bin directory,
you'll have the Python executable,
and then you'll also have Python 3 as a same link to Python,
and Python 3.11 is a same link to Python 3.
And so, you know, one to preserve that.
And also, it turns out on macOS,
they have this very specific kind of layout they want
with like framework,
like I don't really understand it in detail,
but there's sort of like a how a macOS app
is supposed to be structured.
And that it turns out to involve symlinks.
So we just have to support.
That said, I mean, the way we support them is like,
it turns out there's a standard way to put them in zips.
So I say, let's do that.
Like, again, really trying to keep this as boring
as possible.
And then the last thing--
- I didn't know you could have a symlink in a zip file.
That's crazy.
- Yeah, it's an extension from the InfoZip folks,
but that it's because to, I don't know.
Zip's a strange format.
kind of like an oral tradition as much as like an actual like specified format.
But there's an entire documentary on zip and I believe the guy who came up with it.
There's yeah it's even controversial in its early days. It's nuts. But yeah it's
seemed to have won the compression de facto standard these days. Yeah it's definitely
got trade-offs but it's just in terms of it's just really useful just to think that everyone
everything could understand. It's just so compatible. And it's also convenient to do
random access, unlike some of the alternatives. You can pull out one file from the middle if you
want to. The fact that anyone can open it is so much better than it might save one more percent.
Yeah, for sure. Yeah. Cool. Okay, so we've got these... Basically, the pyby file is the zip file.
Is that basically the entire interpreter just kind of bundled into a zip file?
Like what's the deal there?
Yeah. I mean, it's just literally like, you know,
you install Python into a certain directory and then you take that directory,
you put it in a zip file.
There's a little bit of tweaking to like make sure it's self-contained and you can move it
in a portable, relocatable, I guess is a better word.
Yeah.
So sometimes if you just install Python regularly, it's kind of, well, I've hard-coded.
I know that I'm at this particular position on the file system.
And so I need to make sure we don't do that.
And also to make it self-contained, it's like the same thing we do with wheels.
Like you have to vendor some libraries, right?
If it wants to use read line as a library to for like in the REPL to be able to like
edit your line as you're typing it, then, you know, we can't just assume it's on the
system.
We have to include that inside the PyBuy.
Right.
So, and but again, like this is stuff we've all already dealt with with wheels.
There's tools for doing it.
We understand how to do it.
And I'm just reusing those tools.
>> If I were to run a Python application delivered by one of these PyBys, does it have to unzip
the contents into a location and then run it there?
Or can it just run it straight out of memory?
How does that work?
>> Well, so by itself, the format, I mean, it's just a zip file, right?
So you can do with it what you can do with a zip file, which, I mean, is not much on
its own.
You need some software to work with it, right?
Yeah.
Now, that said, I think, so yeah, so like if you just were starting with nothing and
you're like, I just, I have a URL to some Py, a PyBuy and I want to use it, then you'd
have to download it, run a numzip tool, and then you'd have a, you could go into that
directory.
It's a Python environment.
You know, you could run pip in there or whatever.
That said, I think this is a really useful building block
for tools that want to go beyond that.
So things like delivering a pre-built application
that you can just run without unpacking.
There are various tools to do that,
like PyOxidizer, Py2App.
I don't know.
There's a ton of them, actually.
I'm probably forgetting 10 more.
Yeah, the ones that come to mind for me
are Py2App, PyInstaller, and PyOxidizer, for sure.
PyOxidizer being the newest of them.
Yes.
oxidizer because it involves rust somehow.
>> Because all type of things involve rust.
>> Yes.
But yeah, so those tools that it's really useful to be able
to say, OK, I'm going to do some clever thing to set up,
I don't know, a self-extracting executable or whatever it is
they do for their distribution mechanism.
I'm going to create an installer program, whatever it is.
But you still need an actual Python to put into that.
Right. Yeah. And so having a straightforward way where it's okay, that's not their problem anymore
to figure out how to find a Python and get it built and working for the target system.
So they can just say, okay, there's, I can just like grab, you know, okay, yeah, you want to
target, you know, many Linux, cool. I'll just go grab the right Python. It's already there. I know
it works. And now I can take the files out of this PyBI and do whatever I want with them. I can pack
them into my installer or do clever things to make them usable out of memory or whatever.
And they can focus on that part instead of just the like, how do you even get a Python?
Yeah
Or how do you once find yourself in the wrong Python get the right Python? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah
That's a I don't know if that's trickier or less tricky, right? It's one thing to say
Dear user go get Python. You need that. It's another thing to say go upgrade your Python and hope you don't break something
You know, I think.
Yeah, well, but also that's part of the point of these being self-contained is, so I mean,
this is one of the more trivial use cases, right?
But right now we all use virtual ends and mostly that's fine.
But also sometimes, you know, they can get, you know, janking stuff could happen.
Like, you know, you're on Linux, you do an app to upgrade and now your system Pythons
change and all the virtual ends that were based on are broken now.
Yeah.
Because it like had some kind of dependence on that exact binary.
Now, I won't say you would always want to do this, but at least it's nice to have the
option, you could say, okay, instead of making virtual ends, I'm just going to make real
ends. I'm just going to drop a new copy of Python in each environment. And that way,
I just totally self-contained. I know exactly what I have. It upgrades when I decide to
upgrade it. And it's just, you know, it's a nice option, right, sometimes to have that.
And also, it gives you that total isolation, right? So you're just saying about that issue
of like, oh, I wanted to use this. So I went and installed, upgraded my Python. But now
that other thing I was already using broke because they're using the same Python. It's
It's very easy to say, "No, just give them different pipelines."
There's not that much that changes over time.
That's a backwards breaking sort of thing.
I mean, two to three, but I think that's enough.
- Yeah. - Let's put that in the past.
But I did recently, I was working with MongoDB
using Beanie, which was using Motor,
which was using the @async
or @coroutine decorator,
which was removed in 3.11 or 3.10.
one of those recent upgrades.
And it had been deprecated forever.
The people at MongoDB said, we don't care.
We're just going to leave it.
Who wants to put the word async in front of my method?
That's tricky.
I mean, they just probably weren't paid attention.
And my code wouldn't work.
I'm like, why doesn't this work?
Oh, the thing I depend on, which the thing it depends on,
that thing needed less than 310 or whatever,
310 or 311, whatever.
- And that's where CKO struggles to adapt without breaking.
- But yeah, stuff like this-- - Stuff like this does happen.
And this kind of isolation gives you 100% confidence to say,
"I'm going to make this new app. We're going to try running this app on this
in production, and it's not going to hurt anything.
And I don't need Docker."
Yeah, and you can say, or you could say,
"I'm going to use this exact point version in development,
and then I'm going to take that and build it,
use that to create my Docker image.
Like, I don't need the pre-built Docker stuff.
I could just grab Python from PyPI and I know it's the exact same version everyone else is using
Built by the Python org folks, hopefully, you know, we're not there yet. But like that's kind of the
That's why a PEP and not something on github, right? Yeah
Sure. Well, it has been on github for a while, but you know, I have time to yeah
Yeah, so maybe it's it's worth jumping over that but before we do
Two questions, yeah
two top-level questions anyway. So this is about the concept of kind of like pip install python 3.11
or 10 beta 2 or whatever. Whatever it is, yeah. Yeah, does that, is there a way to say
and these three packages off of PyPI? Like can I take and kind of bring a virtual environment
effectively along with me with what you're doing so far? So okay, so PyPI is again by themselves,
I mean, it's just an archive format, right?
A package format. It doesn't do anything.
That said, obviously, yeah, part of what we want is for these to be useful
for things like building environments that have other packages in them and stuff.
So that's the one other thing I didn't--
I forgot to mention about defining the format.
Probably the most interesting part, actually,
is that we do add some new static metadata that we put into the package.
And kind of the motivation there is that I try to figure out, okay, what do I need to
know in order to install wheels into this Python without running it?
Right?
So right now, like, it assumes that it's running on the Python it's installing into.
So any time it wonders, like, you know, okay, like, what ABIs does this Python support?
What version is it?
What platform am I on?
It can just ask the interpreter it's running on, right?
And it's like, OK, well, it would be really nice
if you didn't have to do that, both for efficiency,
like you want to be able to have your installer, your resolver,
figure out which versions of everything
it wants without having to download and run
multiple versions of Python and stuff.
You really like to avoid that.
And it's also things like, I want to build release
distributions for macOS, but I'm on Windows or vice versa.
Or I just want to--
I'm developing my package like Trio on Linux personally,
but I would like it that when I lock my version,
so I know all my collaborators are using the same versions,
that we figure out locks that also work on Windows and Mac
OS.
And I can't just trivial run all those Pythons from one resolver
because it's not running on all three at once.
And Python packaging does have the ability
to have different dependencies on different OSs.
And it can get very complicated to figure out which packages
do I need where.
And so I want to put a bunch of metadata into the PyBI,
all the stuff you need to solve those problems.
So yeah, so the PyBI itself, I think normally they
won't ship with any packages.
Maybe again, callback, maybe in the future
we'll start moving some of the standard library into wheels
that are pre-installed, you could do that.
But I'm guessing for now, they'll mostly just be
a plain vanilla Python install.
But then you could take that, you could take some wheels,
bundle them all together into a new archive if you want.
Or again, whatever you want to do with it,
stick it in a Docker image, whatever.
- Yeah, so it's a step towards,
but not necessarily trying to propose an entire solution
of here is the interpreter and all the dependencies
and the code and just run it as if it was,
it had no dependency on your system.
Just treat it as like a .exe or a .app.
I can just double click.
- It makes that a lot easier than it is right now.
Right now, first step is just to figure out
how do I even build a Python that'll work like that?
And that is like some arcane dark knowledge
written on a tome in black ink on black paper
and a black tomb you have to go find.
It's just-- yeah, it's not easy.
And so just having the ability to say, yeah,
just grab this file, unzip it, drop some wheels in it,
zip it up again.
Now that's a package you can hand to someone,
and it'll work on their system.
That makes it a lot more accessible.
I think I most personally--
I'm not immediately going to go build that one last extra tool,
that someone will. Yeah, I can imagine someone will for sure. Okay, my next question is not what
our shared screen here but is, okay, what impact do you think this would have on PyPI? First of all,
do you see PyPI the way the CDN that delivers packages like Trio and wheels like Trio,
Do you see that as the same channel through which CPython 3.11 is delivered?
yeah, I mean, so I would like these to literally be like you go to pypi/project/cpython
it says like here's the latest release and you click on downloads and it shows you the, yeah,
I'd like it to just literally be stuff you upload to PyPI.
Right, and when you pip and solve from there it figures out the
platform to pick from and it downloads that wheel and off it goes, right?
Yeah.
Do you think that that would add a huge burden to the amount of traffic?
No. I mean, we'll have to see and adapt. But Python itself, it's like,
shoot, it's tens of megabytes.
Okay. There's plenty of other packages.
There are a lot of much bigger, like go look at TensorFlow or something.
There are hundreds of megabyte packages on Python that are very popular.
Also, I mean, Python.org downloads go through the same CDN anyway. It's just sort of different
infrastructure on the back end, but it's still fastly serving it and donating the bandwidth.
So, you know, in that regard, I wouldn't expect much change. And also just, you know, like people
tend to install, you know, wheels more often than they install Python, right? Again, it's hard to
know sort of the second order effects. Like maybe virtual lens will be less popular in favor of full
if this takes off.
And then people start installing Python more than they do now.
But nonetheless, I don't think it's a huge...
I wouldn't anticipate it being a huge change.
And if it turns out to be a problem,
then we can kind of address it then.
Well, you could also do, to a large degree,
you could do like already that caches.
Yeah.
You would just cache the CPython, all the PyBI into the user profile and the second,
third, fourth time you get it.
It's really the CPython and all the doctors and all that stuff that don't understand what
a cache is or any of that.
Yeah.
But then, you know, so like if it comes a real problem, you go to GitHub and you're
like, "Hey, can we work something out so that, you know, you stick a cache in front of PyPI?"
And you know, like stuff like that.
It's not trivial, but you could talk to people and solve problems.
Certainly, I don't think we should hold back the entire design of how we distribute Python
and make it available because, oh, maybe it'll be too easy and people will use it too much.
That's a good problem.
I don't think they use it.
Exactly.
Look, they're using it.
This is terrible.
Yeah.
First, make it easy to use and then figure out how to solve any problems that cause it.
I think we've more than once solved the problem of oh my gosh, they're using it like google netflix. You name it, you know, um
Think of the benefit that you'll be doing for all the developers, especially those
Who have python skills and are looking for a job?
I mean if the popularity of python by downloads is one thing if you could like 4x that
It'd all be more demand like right
Really really downloaded now
Right. Yeah, just go out there just download it five times in every ci job. Just you know
- Exactly. - Throw four of them away.
- Just do it a couple of times, just show.
- Right.
- Awesome.
The question that you put into the pep
here on the screen though, is why not just Conda?
And I, not being a particularly data-focused person,
I definitely prefer using pip over conda
because especially it seems like a lot of the web packages
are not as close to up to date.
There's a latency before it hits conda
and it's like immediately on pip.
That said, there's a bunch of people who are like,
I kind of use Conda for this.
- Yeah.
Yeah, and right, if you're just like,
look, I don't really care about all this.
Like I just, you know, I want to run my Jupyter notebooks
and I, you know, just need a Python that can do that.
And maybe, you know, some NumPy or whatever.
Conda solves that really well.
And this thing could, you know, I'm working on
also potentially solve that really well. And so it feels duplicative to those people. And to them,
it is. You know, it doesn't really -- they're both two solutions that work, but there isn't
necessarily a reason for them to choose one or the other. But --
>> This could also be a foundation for the way that Conda provides Python to itself.
>> Maybe. I don't know. Like, there's a whole other question about how, like,
we could bring Conda and PyPI, pip, that kind of world closer together and interoperate better.
But that's a whole can of worms, lots of complicated stuff. I don't think this pep
itself is going to be the thing that makes a big difference there.
Okay. But it's not an anti-Conda type of thing.
No. Yeah. Well, and so, right. And so, I mean, you can also get to see a version of this in the
path. But basically the way I think about it is that the key reason why we just, like, why PyPI
is a critical piece of infrastructure that, you know, cannot be replaced by anything else,
is not because of its use for end users. I mean, it's great that end users use it and find it
helpful and all that, but that isn't the people who absolutely need it and could not have any
replacement. The reason why we just absolutely need it is for package developers because the way,
again, you're talking about all those different ways you can get Python, right, and there's all
these different ways Python packages get distributed, right? You can brew install packages,
there's versions, you know, NumPy, a patched version of NumPy used to be part of the standard
macOS install, maybe it still is, I don't know. You know, like when you install Blender, there
there are Python packages in there.
Install some game using, was it RenPy?
It's gonna have Python packages in there.
Or just, you know, there's just like,
there's so many different ways that Python code
goes out in the world and gets used
in all these different contexts.
And if you're developing some upstream library,
like, you know, Trio again, or, but, you know,
or requests or NumPy or anything,
then what you absolutely don't want to do
is have to maintain a separate distribution
for all of those different things.
You don't want to have to upload your package to CondaForge
and also to Debian and also to Fedora
and also to BlenderForge.
That doesn't make any sense, right?
So we need this,
and then having every different package maintainer do that,
like that just would be terrible, right?
We just would be unworkable.
So the critical role that PyPI serves, that just nothing else can, is it's this
intermediation point between package uploaders and package users, including package redistributors.
And so I make a release of my package, I upload it to PyPI, and then that's where CondaForge gets
it, that's where Debian gets it, that's where end users get it if they're pulling straight from PyPI.
Like sort of it fans out from there. And the key difference in terms of design between pip and
Conda is that Pip's metadata formats and wheels and the metadata and source disks and all that
are designed around this abstraction of you have some kind of Python environment,
but it could be any of those. It could be on different OSs, it could be different
ways of building it, different layout, different pieces could be missing, like whatever.
you could be laid out in all kinds of different ways. I just know that there is some kind of
Python environment and I have the metadata to figure out how to adapt to how this particular
Python environment is put together. And Conda, on the other hand, is one of these sort of
downstream systems. The reason people love it and like data science is because it's a full-fledged
arbitrary application distribution thing. You can install random C libraries and you can install R
and R packages. It's got compilers that are all there in the one thing. But because of that,
it doesn't have this abstraction of, "Oh, I can handle any Python environment." A conda package,
a Python package is set up to install in a conda Python that's laid out in a way a conda
environment is laid out in the way that using the libraries a conda library has. And so it doesn't
have that flexibility. If you just release something for conda, then it's great for conda,
but it's not usable to Debian and Homebrew and all of those other folks.
And so that's the key thing that PyPI does, right? It has that abstraction that lets you
have the Python packaging ecosystem of all those packages and their dependencies on each other,
and then you project it down into each of these more specific specialized packaging systems.
And then also because, you know, as a...
That's the other thing as a package maintainer.
I don't just write my package and upload it.
Like I'm also using all the other open source maintainers work as I do it.
We're all working together, right?
And I'm depending on their work and they're depending on mine.
And so I need to be able to say like, okay, you know,
my package needs those three other packages and here are the versions.
And I need to be able to create an environment with those versions
and test it before I upload my package to PyPI.
And so again, all that work has to happen at that higher abstraction level.
Like you can't just say, I'm going to take the latest version from Conda and test against it,
because that's not necessarily the version that other people will get.
Where you take the versions from PyPI, those are like the original ones.
I can get exactly-- I have access to anything anyone has ever uploaded
as soon as they upload it, and I can test them all together.
And then if Conda wants to take some curated subset of those or whatever, that's great.
that's a really valuable service, but they kind of need that underlying set of packages to curate.
And that's what PyPI is.
Yeah, that's true.
Yeah.
PyPI is kind of the definitive source of truth as the package creator intended it to be.
Yeah. And then, of course, for a lot of end users, it turns out that just going straight
to that without any intermediary works great for them. And that's really cool. But also,
It's not like I don't have anything against people who prefer to go through Debian or
Conda or whatever. I think that's also great if that works better for you. But for the folks who
are developing packages to upload or who just would rather just get stuff straight from the source,
the PyBIs I think can solve a lot of problems. That Conda, it just doesn't address those. It
has a different focus. >> Right. Trying to make it swap over to do that might
kill a little bit of what it's good for, you know? Yeah. All right. Let's see. So, let's move on to
your announcement here. I think... >> Okay. Right. Yeah. >> So, over on discuss.python.org,
when was this? This was January 21st. >> A few months ago. >> Yeah, a few months ago,
you announced PyBI and Posi. And Posi is, we talked about this mythical pip that could pip
install CPython 3.11. Posi is that mythical pip, right?
>> Yeah, so yeah, the pip 7.11, the PyBI stuff is just the one brick in my master plan.
So, right. Because, yeah, because sort of this vision I had in mind, I kind of alluded to earlier
talking about like, you know, okay, if somebody does, you know, Git clone my project, I want them
to just run the tests and know that they have the right version of Python and the right version of
the dependencies and just kind of, you know, and they know how to run the, you know, just do it,
right? Encode all that information somewhere. And Posey is sort of my experimental, it's not ready
to use, but it does have a lot of stuff working. It's my attempt to solve that part of the problem.
So the vision is Posi is a full re-implementation of Pip,
the metadata parsers and dependency resolvers
and archive installers and all of that,
except I rewrote it all in Rust, as is the style.
But it's all built around PyBI.
So it doesn't-- maybe at some point
will also start supporting VNs or user-installed Pythons.
But for now, for the MVP, it's just like, OK, yeah,
you have a PyBuy.
I will grab that.
I will grab packages that are compatible with it.
I will arrange them all to run together based on--
you just say what you need.
I turn that into a lock file.
I fetch those packages.
I run your test script or whatever.
And yeah, I mean, that is the core idea.
And one advantage of being in Rust is that it's just because--
so obviously, if you want to hack on it,
then you need a Rust compiler and stuff.
But if you just want to use it, then we can just take a--
we can compile it down to a single binary
that you just upload to wherever,
install it from wherever.
And you just drop it on your system, you run it,
and it's self-contained.
It can handle everything from there.
So again, thinking of that target audience of beginners,
you say, OK, install this one program.
And now you type Posey run.
And oh, look, you're in a REPL.
And now internally, of course, I had
to go find the latest version of Python
and grab it and figure out which build is right for your system.
But you don't have to think about that.
You just hit Enter, and it happens.
And there's your REPL.
Or you say Posey add requests, or Posey add Jupyter,
and then Posey run Notebook.
And it kind of is handling the environments behind the scenes.
>> Yeah, we did a panel discussion
with a bunch of core developers around packaging recently.
And a lot of them were saying things like--
I don't really want to put words in their mouth,
but I'm kind of getting the sense that, OK,
so we have a bunch of tools that are really neat that
live within Python, you know, Dickey and Hatch, Poetry, those, that category of tools, Pip
itself even.
And some of the challenges or problems that they would like to solve, they could unlock
a simpler API if it was turned inside out, right?
If the tool itself controlled Python, it didn't depend on Python to get started.
They mentioned Rust up as a way to get started, which is a way to kind of install a version
of rust and get started, right? And it feels to me like this is pretty close to that.
Yeah, there's a lot of overlap, for sure, in terms of sort of goals and approach and
all of that.
So one challenge I see is, so like, for example, to run the application for the, with the Python
and that's bundled up inside of one of these PyBIs
is you would say posy run or posy some kind of file
or something like that, right?
- Sure, yeah, whatever exactly.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, whatever the CLI
that's yet to be fully spec'd out comes out to be.
But could you do things like, could you create,
speaking of symlinks and other types of stuff,
could you create just in the same folder
where that app lives a Python
that actually just calls posy the Python inside
instead of Python itself and pip that says,
you know, Posey run pip inside this Python
to kind of bridge, to unify the API
from where people are coming from.
To kind of expose the same tools
that are inside a little bit, you know what I mean?
- Well, so yes, I mean, so the way I am currently
sort of in my current prototype, basically,
it doesn't work like that
just because it felt sort of more complicated
to then try to expose those things.
So sort of the sense is like,
let's see how far we can get with treating
sort of the UI paradigm of like Posi
is just your front end to Python.
Like you don't, you just,
you start your command with Posi
and that's the only command you need to know kind of.
And so, and that also allows some interesting things.
So like the way Posi does environments right now
is you can have multiple environments within a project.
Like if you need to test against multiple Python versions
or you need different installs for, I don't know,
tests and for building your docs and whatever.
But it doesn't actually materialize all those
as separate independent virtual environments.
Instead what it does is,
for like each unique wheel or PyBi that it needs,
it unpacks that into its own directory.
And then on the fly, it assembles environments
by setting up environment variables
so that it can launch a Python in such a way
that it picks the right Python and launches in such a way
that it sees the right packages it's supposed to see.
But there's only one copy of those packages on disk.
If you have multiple environments,
if you want to try out different versions or whatever,
it can just sort of do that
without having to go rearrange everything on disk.
And that's just, it's convenient.
It's just a really nice way to work
with sort of having declarative Python environments.
So you never update an environment in place.
There is no environment in place.
It's just on each command you run,
it sort of knows declaratively,
okay, these are which packages are supposed to be there.
I'll give you those packages.
So there isn't even a concept exactly
of like pip upgrade or pip install.
You can just say that next time I invoke environment,
I'm gonna give you a different specification
for which versions I want.
And it'll make sure that happens.
- Feels a little like Docker, right?
Like if you create a Docker image
and you run a container, you want to make changes to it.
You don't log into the container typically and--
- In that sense, right, yeah.
- Yeah, but you would just say,
okay, well, we changed the Dockerfile,
we shut it down and we started back up
with the new better version of itself, right?
That in that sense, I think it's like Docker.
- Yeah, the main difference,
a big difference would be that in Docker,
then when you build it,
like the actual Dockerfile is this big old imperative,
go scribble here and then delete that
and then put something else, that kind of thing.
It's not like, here's the list of things you need.
Well, it feels to me like it may be a better solution than what Docker is giving you.
If what you really just want to do is run a Python, an isolated Python thing repeatedly,
because with Docker, the idea is like, well, you want it isolated.
So let's do this. Let me give you an entire separate copy of Linux.
Right.
I know what you're running it in like not a full VM way, and it's not as heavy as a VM, but it's still,
you're configuring a Linux computer inside of this container in the way that
Whereas this is just like, I just want Python configured, not everything.
Well, and even more, like, in Docker,
if you want to make sure that you run Docker build twice
and get the same package versions, you have to do that yourself.
You have to use, I don't know, pip compile or something like create a lock file
and then install from that instead of your original requirements.
It's a whole thing with lots of ways to get it wrong.
Whereas in Posi, the way I've written it currently,
it's just like there is, you know, there's one operation, one internal function that takes a set
of like, okay, these are the packages I want. And it like renders that down into a block file,
like here's the exact set of packages you need, including all the dependencies and all their
versions. And then that's the thing that you hand to the run me an environment. So like you have to
go through that step. It's just built in. And so we can like, you know, so and of course, you know,
as we build up the, you know, CLI and stuff, ideal will be that that will be then, you know,
written to disk, similar to a cargo.lock or poetry.lock or whatever. And so you just automatically
get that reproducibility, which you don't get that automatically from Docker.
Right. Nice. So this is a thing that people could go get on your GitHub profile. They
could check this out and they could try it, right?
So yeah, let's see.
So yeah, so obviously there's a lot of moving parts here.
Folks want to help with the PyBI part, that PEP 7.11.
There's lots of stuff you could use help with.
But it is also-- there's a draft PEP up.
And I have built lots of PyBI packages
for lots of different versions of Python.
For Mac, Windows, Linux, they're up on a CDN.
So that uses the same API as PyPI.
So you could pip install from there
if you had a pip that did it.
So it is stuff you can try out right now,
experiment with at least.
And then, yeah, as for the Posi part,
again, like I said, it's mostly the backend stuff,
but it is a pretty complete implementation
of all the packaging stuff.
It can actually do that demo I was just saying,
of like, I need these three packages
in this version of Python,
and it can do the dependency resolution
for a named specific operating system,
which may not be the one you're running on,
and then generate that environment
and actually invoke it.
Well, you can only invoke it if it's for the operating system
you're running on, of course.
But it can do all that stuff.
There isn't really a UI in front of it yet.
So it's not like something I'm suggesting you go start
rolling out to your company.
>> Everyone adopt it, yeah.
>> But if this is like an exciting project for you,
then you could check it out, see where it's at,
join in, whatever.
There's definitely tons of stuff to do.
But there's a good, solid start.
And I think it's--
at this point, I'm pretty confident everything
could work, right?
Kind of the proving it out part is pretty much there, done.
>> Question from Marwan audience.
Hypothetically speaking, does a posy.lock
work as is on different platforms?
>> Right, yes.
So cross-platform support is a huge issue with locking.
I don't know if anyone's ever tried to do this with Pipkin
pile. It just doesn't work. If you have anything complicated, like multiple Python versions,
it just doesn't work. They tried hard, but yeah. So what I'm doing right now in Posey
is I've tried to kind of keep it simple. I just say, like, you know, tell me which platforms
you care about. You know, Resedish Linux and Windows 64 and macOS and Intel. You'll give
me a list. And then it will -- it can go through -- just loop through that and for each one
find the right PyBI, look up the metadata to figure out which kinds of packages are
appropriate to install there and generate a lock file for each of those. And then you
can somehow merge the common parts
and write them to a file.
So the individual things that resolve this set of versions--
or set of package requests into an exact set of versions,
that only runs for one specific platform at a time.
But you can run it multiple times.
It might be possible to do something smarter.
So I know Poetry has some algorithm
that I don't really understand very well,
where they try to sort of simultaneously resolve
all the platforms into their lock file.
And then the way the lock file works is then you actually,
it's like only like mostly resolved.
And then when you actually go to install,
it does like that last step to try to narrow it down
to the exact platform you're on.
And I just, I don't quite,
no one's been able to explain to me
at how exactly that algorithm works,
or even like, I'm not a hundred percent sure it's even like,
if it's fully correct or if it's heuristics-based or what.
So I don't know.
But we can change--
there's lots of options.
We can change the code if there's a better way to do it.
Just that's where I'm at so far.
- Yeah.
So there's something that people can play with,
but it's early days.
- Yeah.
- And you wouldn't mind having help if people wanted to--
- I know, for sure.
If you've been looking for an excuse to learn Rust,
if you want to play around with cool...
I mean, there's interesting problems in terms of things
like how you efficiently resolve--
do package resolution.
It's like this whole messy logic programming problem.
It's MP complete.
There's just interesting system engineering problems of like,
OK, we're going to really make this really nice to use.
How do you unpack 20 wheels as fast as possible?
You get to use threads and concurrency
and all kinds of stuff.
Yeah, there's lots of cool technical bits too.
And of course, just making something that's like a joy to use,
fits nicely in your hand.
Lots of fun user interface problems.
Yeah. - Yeah.
- I'm excited about it, if you can probably tell.
Like I just love all kinds of problems.
- Yeah, absolutely.
So this announcement was on discuss.python.org
and I thought, okay, well, it says there's 72 responses.
Let me flip down and see how this landed with people, right?
- Okay, yeah.
You know, a wide variety of responses.
- Yeah, well, but I mean, I would say
that at least the top batch, the first bunch of people,
Paul Moore, deeply involved with Pip, jumps in, says,
"This is beyond awesome.
"I had realized you were working actively on this.
"I'll take a look.
"I'd love to help out too."
Talks about Rust a little.
Frederick says, "Really nice to see this.
"This is a great direction."
Ana says, "It certainly blew my mind.
"Count me in on how we could explore how this might work
for Conda and so on.
And just I thought it was really, really quite positive
how many next person-- this checks many of the boxes
of what I have in mind.
So it seems like it's landing well with the community.
I hope that it continues to make good progress.
Yeah.
I think the biggest thing is there were definitely
some folks going, OK, but why are you
writing everything in Rust?
Especially, we've spent a lot of effort
not just making standards for Python packaging, but also implementing those. You can pip install
packaging right now, and that is a library that can do things like unpack wheels and access the
PyPI. I forget exactly which set, but a lot of the tricky stuff, parse Python metadata formats,
and just all these different tricky things. It's like, why are you re-implementing this?
And also, does it like send the wrong message that like, you know, when we wanted to do something
complicated, we thought Python wasn't good enough, we needed to switch to Rust. And I get where
they're coming from. But, well, I mean, there's a few things. So one is just that I thought writing
in Rust would be fun. You know, I'm not telling you, you can't use Python for anything.
Sure. I mean, well, let's take a step back and say, how would you propose writing that in Python?
- If there is no Python, right? - No, it's possible, right?
- So, like, Conda's written in Python, right? - Okay.
But, and the way... So, it makes the distribution a little complicated,
because, like, when you get your conda.sh or mini-conda, you know, like the installer,
it has a Python package inside it, which it unpacks, so it uses it to run Conda to install,
like, another Python or whatever it is that you want to install with Conda.
But it sort of has one built in. And you could do the same thing for something like Posey.
Use something like PyInstaller to build an executable.
Exactly. Yeah, but then for PyInstaller effectively, right?
Just kind of recursively do that. It's totally something one could do.
So yeah, the main reasons I'm not to go that way is one is, like I said,
was more interesting to me. It's one thing. There's also, like, every language has trade-offs,
right? And the exact set of things you want from a package installer are kind of right in Rust
sweet spot and not Pythons. So there's sort of four things that are really important for a tool
like Posey. So there's the initial install. There's the how quickly it starts up. Because
like this is in between you and invoking Python or whatever it is you actually want to do.
there's how quickly you can resolve packages, and how quickly can it unpack packages.
Like those are the things that you care about. Those are the big load-bearing pieces.
And those are like kind of four of Python's weakest spots, honestly.
So we just talked about the deployment part. You can make it work, but it's not as straightforward
as some things. There'd be more possible moving parts, things that could go wrong.
It's not the strongest argument, but it is there.
For startup speed, just notoriously one of Python's weak spots because it has to do all
those imports from scratch every time. Tools like Mercurial have struggled with a lot.
Lots of Python applications, doesn't matter, but for this particular one,
that would be a challenge. And then resolving is big, heavy, like that MP complete, just really
gnarly burning as many CPUs as you can on complicated logical operations. Again, not
Python's strongest point. It's not something you can use NumPy for and it's not like, you
know, I/O bound or anything.
>> Yeah. You could use something like Cython potentially, using no-gil.
>> Yeah, right. But then you'd basically be writing it in C at that point, like the core
logic.
>> Yeah, you're pretty far from core Python in that anyway.
Yeah. And then finally, unpacking files is totally I/O bound and so simple that it's
actually a big advantage to be able to... I/O is so fast these days with SSDs and everything,
and VME drives, that almost any overhead in the unpacking path actually is pretty substantial
as a relative proportion. So you add one Python operation per 100 kilobytes written,
and that might suddenly be like a 2x slowdown,
just because everything else is so fast
that even that small amount of Python overhead could be large.
And, you know, in a tool like this, people are really sensitive.
Like, they really care if it takes 10 seconds versus one second
to unpack the environment.
Like, that's just a huge difference in usability.
So I think it's just kind of really...
Like, it just happens to be an exact combination of things
that makes Rust pretty compelling.
But you could do it the other way, too.
I'm not making a--
it isn't meant as a political point.
>>Luis: Yeah, OK, got it.
Python is written in C.
>>Tom: Yeah, sure.
It's a PyPy, but--
>>Luis: I mean, the core bit of it is written in C, right?
>>Tom: No, but PyPy is written in Python, right?
Hence the name.
>>Luis: Yeah, that's true.
>>Tom: But yeah, CPython written in C.
It says it right there.
>>Luis: Yeah, exactly.
OK, interesting.
>> Yeah.
>> I think we're probably out of time to dive much further in this.
>> Sure, yeah, I think we covered a lot.
>> I think we covered a lot. I guess --
>> Anything else you want to --
>> Give me your thoughts on the future. What do you think -- is the PEP gaining traction? This is in draft mode. I don't know how much I emphasized at the beginning, but it is not an accepted --
>> Yes, that is important to be clear on that.
>> Yeah.
I wrote it, I posted it for feedback.
That's as far as it's gotten.
There's no commitment on anyone's part
to that this is what's actually going to happen.
That said, I'm pretty optimistic.
Like I said, I got a little bit of pushback on the POSI part
because of the rust and whatever.
But I don't think I've gotten--
I can't think of really any pushback on the PEP 711,
the actual PyBI part.
Except people are like, well, but why aren't you
using Conda or something, which, you know,
fair question, but you know, there's an answer.
And I don't think anyone, like,
it's not something that like the people that you need,
whose agreement you need to get this accepted are like,
you know, the PyPI maintainers
and Python packaging maintainers.
And they are totally okay with like,
Conda's not the solution to everything, obviously.
Right?
- Right, sure.
Well, how complicated would it be to put Conda
into this particular use case, right?
- Yeah, I mean, there's definitely room
to collaborate better there.
And I would love to see that in the future.
But yeah, but my sense is that there's just really hasn't
been a lot of, like people just seem pretty much like,
yeah, this is cool.
I guess actually the biggest thing is that there's been
some feedback from folks like the PyOxidizer folks
saying like, hey, we would like a bit more metadata
so we can fully, you know,
dissolve some of our other things we wanna do.
Like we wanna be able to cross compile for a given Python
and we need to know a bit more about the target Python
in order to do that.
So that's just a very technical, it's like, yeah, okay, more stuff we should add and tweak.
But the core idea...
- I thought it was just an idea, it's just like a...
- Yeah, I think the basic idea, generally people seem to be on board.
I'm not going to like, you know, make a commitment to what like Python.org and PyPI and all they're actually going to do.
But I'm pretty hopeful.
I think that, you know, there are definitely some of the folks involved in like building the Python.org downloads right now are like,
"Oh, yeah, I'd build one of these if that was standard, sure."
So it isn't all signed off on,
but there seems to be a pretty reasonable consensus
that this is a good direction
that we're interested in moving in.
- Well, it sure caught my attention when I saw it.
So I'm excited to see what it's like.
- Yeah, well, thanks for having me on to talk about it.
- Yeah, you bet.
No, let me just ask you real quick,
the final two questions,
since it has been five years since I asked them of you.
- Okay.
- When you write some Python code,
do you work on this?
What editor are you using these days?
I am using Emacs, same as I've been since I was 13.
So that's not a political position.
That's just, I'm stuck.
- Like all your coming chords, right?
Okay.
- You know, like that's it.
- Excellent.
And then notable PyPI package?
- Just some random PyPI package.
- Yeah, just something you like ran across.
This is awesome.
People should know about this.
Could be very popular, not popular at all.
- Oh man, shoot.
I did not prepare for this.
Should have.
I mean, I don't--
like, there's some obvious--
obviously, I like--
Trio's been thinking about a lot,
but that's not an interesting answer for this.
>>Victor: You mentioned Ruff earlier.
>>Tom: I think you mentioned Ruff, but Ruff is pretty cool.
>>Victor: Maybe I didn't mention Ruff.
Yeah, OK.
>>Tom: Ruff is very awesome.
If anyone doesn't know, Ruff is sort of Flake 8 and such
reimplemented in Rust, so it's like 100 times faster.
like, you just like instantaneously lint all your code,
which is very sweet.
- It is a selling point for Rust integrated with Python,
right?
Like another use case that looks pretty neat.
- Yeah.
And I, you know, sort of as I'm digging into it,
I'm really impressed at how they, those two,
how well they fit together.
People put a lot of work into like making that really smooth
and having them collaborate well.
Actually, it's something I've just been working on at work
is we've been having trouble with,
So in an async library like Trio,
you have lots of tasks running concurrently, but they only--
the scheduler only gets to switch from one task to another
when one task explicitly lets go,
says, OK, I can stop here.
We're using an await statement.
So it's possible to write code where you accidentally
don't do that for a long time, and that task
will just hog all the runtime and block
other tasks from running.
And it'd be nice--
it's hard to tell when that's happening.
And a similar thing could happen with the gil.
So if you have like an extension library,
like PyTorch or something,
and they forget to drop the gil
before doing some big heavyweight operation,
then it could just block any other threads from running.
That's really awkward.
We've been having trouble with that.
But well, you know, like PySpy,
there's another really cool package,
if anyone's seen it,
is a Rust profiler for Python
that can just sit outside your process
and can tell you what it's doing.
But also it being in Rust and it's up on crates.io, I could just write a little program that imports
PySpy and uses it as a library and tweak it so instead of looking for where's code spending
time, it detects, OK, is something hogging the GIL or the run loop? And give me the traceback.
Show me which code is doing that. And it's, again, really neat to be able to get that
really deep insight into this Python stuff that we're still using it. It's still Python,
but the Rust really is a great flavor that goes with it.
Cool. PySpy. All right, people can check that out. That's sampling profiler for Python programs.
Yes. Yes. PySpy is really cool.
Indeed. All right. Well, thanks for being here. If people are interested in the PEP,
what should they do?
I mean, I guess the post on discuss.python.org is the best place for feedback.
It's also where I posted about Posey.
So if you want to see the discussion or join in, that's a good place.
If you want to help, then yeah, github.com/njsmith/posey is the repository.
Jump in, send PRs, file issues, whatever.
Or just send me a--
I don't know.
What's the 2.me, I guess?
The Mastodon version?
I'm not really on Twitter these days.
But yeah, njs@mastodon.social.
And I'll see you there.
Cool.
All right, well, Nathaniel, thanks for being here.
Thanks for this pep.
It looks interesting.
Yeah, thanks.
It's great being here.
Yeah, you bet.
Hey, real quick before we call a wrap on the YouTube channel,
let me just ask a follow-up real quick with one question.
>> Good, Diego on the other side says, "I'm in academia and consider leaving for the private
sector.
Was leaving academia easy?
Do you miss anything about it?"
>> Oh, man.
This is a big thing.
So I did not leave academia voluntarily.
I left academia because I got very ill.
I have ulcerative colitis.
It's one of these autoimmune things.
Basically, yeah, my immune system decided my large intestine is evil and should be destroyed.
And basically it is a thing about academia.
There's many things I love about it, but it is a very sort of intense, like you can't,
you basically, like there is no place in that.
There is just no long-term place in academia for someone who isn't, you know, able to work
like, you know, 60 hour weeks and just like really be grinding away.
that is not compatible with being really sick and needing a few years to like figure out
treatments and just all of the stuff I was dealing with. And so it was messy and complicated, but like
you know I ended up leaving academia because of that. And now I'm kind of getting back on my feet
and trying to get back into academia as a whole thing. And it's also like well I'm not sure I
really am able to get up to that grind. And also you know I'm just in a rough position after you
being ill for so long and all that.
So I don't know where the future will lead.
But I don't know.
Academia is-- there's a lot of wonderful things.
And there's kind of some brainwashing while you're in it,
that this is the best.
Everyone kind of reassuring themselves.
Of course you want-- who wouldn't want to be here?
Like, yeah, this is fantastic.
We're the best.
And there are all these unique advantages, too.
But there are other options.
Life is not over if you leave academia.
There are lots of wonderful options.
I left way earlier than you. I left in the middle of my PhD program.
And the one thing, you know, asking, what did you miss?
I thought I would miss teaching people because I got to teach, you know,
calculus, linear algebra, stuff like that.
I do that every day.
Right. I do that with my podcast, I do that with my talk by the untrained,
and I make courses like there's room for like that kind of stuff
and all the freedom to explore and move and change jobs
more than once every five years.
Yeah. Or yeah, there's a lot of advantages.
job in the world.
Exactly, there's three job openings in the world. I
apply for them in September, I get
notified in April, and I get them in
the next year. Like that is a crazy
delay in
opportunity to move around, and
you don't have that as a straight-up
developer. Yeah, and I think that's a good
point that like there are a lot of
opportunities for
parts of the stuff that are great about
academia, if you can find them. So like
like you're talking about education, but
also like
realistically in terms of impact on the
world, my theoretical work in
my blog post on structured concurrency
is probably much larger than my
papers. I have some well-cited papers
but it's kind of within one
niche and that's just a blog post. I
mean, there doesn't even have an
OID or anything but
but the true impact is pretty big. It
may well be what I'm remembered for or
or something, you know?
Like, it's just, yeah.
- Yeah, who knows?
Cool, well, thanks for sharing that.
And I'm glad to see you doing better.
- Yeah, thanks a lot.
- Yeah, cool.
Thanks again for being on the show.
See you later.
- See you.
[BLANK_AUDIO]